docs: tutorial for WebSockets with AsyncAPI (#2245)
asyncapi/website: pages/docs/tutorials/websocket/index.md

---

> title: Create an AsyncAPI Document for a Slackbot with WebSockets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Create an AsyncAPI document for a Slackbot with WebSocket.
```

> description: In this tutorial, you'll learn how to create an AsyncAPI document designed for a Slack application that operates in Socket Mode using the WebSockets protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: In this tutorial, you'll learn how to create an AsyncAPI document designed for a Slack application that operates in Socket Mode using the WebSocket protocol.
```

weight: 210
---

## Introduction

> In this tutorial, you will learn how to write an AsyncAPI document designed for a Slack application that operates in Socket Mode. The aim is to help you grasp a real-world application of AsyncAPI with the WebSocket protocol. You will learn how to write AsyncAPI document for a consumer-only application receiving a stream of messages from a WebSocket server. You will also learn why the AsyncAPI bindings feature exist and how to use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will learn how to write an AsyncAPI document designed for a Slack application that operates in Socket Mode. The aim is to help you grasp a real-world application of AsyncAPI with the WebSocket protocol. You will learn how to write an AsyncAPI document for a consumer-only application receiving a stream of messages from a WebSocket server. You will also learn why the AsyncAPI bindings feature exists and how to use it.
```

> Consider a scenario where you are in charge of maintaining a highly active Slack workspace. You want an easy way to keep track of the popular messages across all the channels but doing this manually would be a difficult task. To simplify this process, you’re going to build a Slackbot called `Heart-Counter` that actively monitors reactions added to a message and determine its popularity by counting the reactions of the “heart” emoji.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider a scenario where you are in charge of maintaining a highly active Slack workspace. You want an easy way to keep track of the popular messages across all channels, but doing this manually would be difficult. To simplify this process, you will build a Slackbot called `Heart-Counter` that actively monitors reactions added to a message and determines its popularity by counting the reactions of the “heart” emoji.
```

> Here’s a visual representation of how `Heart-Counter` should work: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here’s a visual representation of how the `Heart-Counter` should work: 
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant Heart-Counter
participant Slack Server (Socket Mode)
participant User

Heart-Counter ->>Slack Server (Socket Mode): Connect
Note right of Heart-Counter: Establish WebSocket connection

Slack Server (Socket Mode)->> Heart-Counter : Handshake
Note left of Slack Server (Socket Mode): Establish Socket Mode connection

Slack Server (Socket Mode)->> Heart-Counter : Sends "hello" event
Note left of Slack Server (Socket Mode): Confirms successful connection

User-->>Slack Server (Socket Mode): Adds emoji to a message.

Slack Server (Socket Mode)->>Heart-Counter: Sending "reaction_added" payload

Note left of Heart-Counter: Event received
``` 

## Background context

> [WebSocket](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebSocket) is a communication protocol that enables simultaneous bidirectional data exchange between a client and a server over a single, long-lived connection. Unlike HTTP, which relies on the request-response model, WebSocket is ideal for scenarios where real-time, interactive and low-latency communication is necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[WebSocket](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebSocket) is a communication protocol that enables simultaneous bidirectional data exchange between a client and a server over a single, long-lived connection. Unlike HTTP, which relies on the request-response model, WebSocket is ideal for scenarios where real-time, interactive, and low-latency communication is necessary.
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
Client -->> Server: Initiate WebSocket Connection
Server -->> Client: Message 1
Server -->> Client: Message 2
Server -->> Client: Message 3
Server -->> Client: Message 4
```

In Slack, WebSocket is employed as part of its [Socket Mode](https://api.slack.com/apis/connections/socket) feature to facilitate real-time notifications between Slack's servers and third-party applications or bots. The [Slack Event API](https://api.slack.com/apis/connections/events-api) is a tool that lets you receive real-time notifications of specific events in a Slack workspace such as messages, reactions, and user presence changes.

## Define AsyncAPI version, API information, and server

> You start your AsyncAPI document by specifying the AsyncAPI version and essential information about your Slack application's API which includes details such as the `title`, `version` and `description`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You start your AsyncAPI document by specifying the AsyncAPI version and essential information about your Slack application's API, which includes details such as the `title,` `version,` and `description.`
```

> The `servers` section allows you to define the protocol and specify information about the URLs your application will use, such as  `host`, `pathname`, `protocol` and `description`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `servers` section allows you to define the protocol and specify information about the URLs your application will use, such as  `host`, `pathname`, `protocol`, and `description`.
```

<Remember>
The WebSocket URL is generated  by invoking the <a href="https://api.slack.com/methods/apps.connections.open">apps.connections.open</a> method from Slack’s API. You use the authentication tokens obtained during the configuration of your Slackbot to generate this URL.
</Remember>

<CodeBlock language="yaml">
{`asyncapi: '3.0.0'
info:

>   title: Create an AsyncAPI Document for a Slackbot with WebSockets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  title: Create an AsyncAPI document for a Slackbot with WebSocket
```

  version: '1.0.0'
  description:  |
    The Heart-Counter manages popular messages in a Slack workspace by monitoring message reaction data
servers:
  production:
    host: wss-primary.slack.com
    pathname: /link
    protocol: wss
    description: Slack's server in Socket Mode for real-time communication `}

> </CodeBlock>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You start your AsyncAPI document by specifying the AsyncAPI version and essential information about your Slack application's API which includes details such as the `title`, `version` and `description`.

<CodeBlock language="yaml" highlightedLines={[3,4,5]}>
{`asyncapi: '3.0.0'
info:
  title: Create an AsyncAPI Document for a Slackbot with WebSockets
  version: '1.0.0'
  description:  |
    The Heart-Counter manages popular messages in a Slack workspace by monitoring message reaction data`}
</CodeBlock>

The `servers` section allows you to define the protocol and specify information about the URLs your application will use, such as  `host`, `pathname`, `protocol` and `description`.

<Remember>
The WebSocket URL is generated  by invoking the <a href="https://api.slack.com/methods/apps.connections.open">apps.connections.open</a> method from Slack’s API. You use the authentication tokens obtained during the configuration of your Slackbot to generate this URL.
</Remember>

<CodeBlock language="yaml" highlightedLines={[3,4,5]}>
{`servers:
  production:
    host: wss-primary.slack.com
    pathname: /link
    protocol: wss
    description: Slack's server in Socket Mode for real-time communication `}
</CodeBlock>
```

Please notice the `highlightedLines` - this is why I recommended `CodeBlock` component. Try to apply my change, see result and consider doing the same for other code snippets, to highlight the critical parts user should look at (link text with snippet this way)

Author: @derberg Thank you! 
I did want to highlight some snippets but I felt highlight a single line made it look too awkward and highlighting a bunch of lines together felt too cluttered. Currently having some mixed feelings about this. I've pushed a change with some highlights.
@derberg , @alequetzalli  What do you think?

Reviewer: Nice! The highlighted lines seem to work well and I def think they are helpful for guiding readers. I would def keep these/add any more you think are missing. 

I didn't even know we could do this! LOL thanks for the learning 😸

            approximate_connection_time:
              type: integer
      reaction:
        type: object
        properties:
          user:
            type: string
            description: User ID who performed this event
          reaction:
            type: string
            description: The only reaction that we need is a heart emoji
          item_user:
            type: string
            description: User ID that created the original item that has been reacted to
          item:
            type: object
            properties:
              channel:
                type: string
                description: Channel information of original message
              ts:
                type: string
                description: Timestamp information of original message
          event_ts:
            type: string
            description: Reaction timestamp `}
</CodeBlock>

## Define channels and  bindings

The `channels` attribute defines a communication channel for the event. The `address` specifies where the channel is tuned in to receive messages while the `messages` property defines a key-value pair where each key corresponds to the event it's set up to handle.

> The WebSocket URL generated for `Heart-Counter` includes authentication tokens. This information is represented using `query` parameters. Query parameters are specific to HTTP protocol and also partially to WebSocket that uses HTTP to establish connection between client and server. Since this is protocol-specific information you need to use AsyncAPI feature called `bindings` that enables you to provide protocol-specific information inside AsyncAPI document using the `bindings` attribute. By utilizing the `query` object from the WebSocket binding, you can outline the parameters needed for the connection and the conditions they must meet. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The WebSocket URL generated for `Heart-Counter` includes authentication tokens. This information is represented using `query` parameters. Query parameters are specific to HTTP protocol and partially to WebSocket, which uses HTTP to connect client and server. Since this is protocol-specific information, you must use an AsyncAPI feature called `bindings` that enables you to provide protocol-specific information inside the AsyncAPI document using the `bindings` attribute. By utilizing the `query` object from the WebSocket binding, you can outline the parameters needed for the connection and the conditions they must meet. 
```

<CodeBlock language="yaml" highlightedLines={[9]}>
{`channels:
  root:
    address: /
    messages:
      hello:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/hello'
      reaction:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/reaction'
    bindings:
      ws:
        query:
          type: object
          description: Tokens are produced in the WebSocket URL generated from the [apps.connections.open](https://api.slack.com/methods/apps.connections.open) method from Slack’s API
          properties:
            ticket:
              type: string
              description: Temporary token generated when connection is initiated
              const: '13748dac-b866-4ea7-b98e-4fb7895c0a7f'
            app_id:
              type: string
              description: Unique identifier assigned to the Slack app
              const: 'fe684dfa62159c6ac646beeac31c8f4ef415e4f39c626c2dbd1530e3a690892f' `}
</CodeBlock>

## Define operations 

> The `operation` property, is all about defining specific tasks your application can perform. Essentially, it's how `Heart-Counter` interacts with Slack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `operation` property is all about defining specific tasks your application can perform. Essentially, it's how the `Heart-Counter` interacts with Slack.
```

In this example, the `helloListener` operation keeps an eye out for the message sent by the Slack server when a WebSocket connection is successfully established. On the other hand, the `reactionListener` is focused on the `reaction_added` event type.

> Your Slack application is designed to be notified of events within your workspace. It does this by subscribing to a specific event type making use of Slack's Event API.  So in this case the `action` property in both the operations is set to `receive` events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your Slack application is designed to be notified of events within your workspace. It subscribes to a specific event type and uses Slack's Event API. In this case, both operations' `action` property is set to `receive` events.
```

<CodeBlock language="yaml" highlightedLines={[3,9]}>
{`operations:
  helloListener:
    action: receive
    channel:
      $ref: '#/channels/root'
    messages:
      - $ref: '#/channels/root/messages/hello'
  reactionListener:
    action: receive
    channel:
      $ref: '#/channels/root'
    messages:
      - $ref: '#/channels/root/messages/reaction' `}
</CodeBlock>

> You've now completed the tutorial! Putting these blocks together gives you your AsyncAPI document all ready to go.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Congratulations, you've completed the tutorial! Putting these blocks together gives you an AsyncAPI document all ready to go.
```

<CodeBlock language="yaml">
{`asyncapi: '3.0.0'
info:

>   title: Create an AsyncAPI Document for a Slackbot with WebSockets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  title: Create an AsyncAPI document for a Slackbot with WebSocket
```

          app_id:
            type: string
          num_connections:
            type: integer
          debug_info:
            type: object
            properties:
              host:
                type: string
              started:
                type: string
              build_number:
                type: integer
              approximate_connection_time:
                type: integer
    reaction:
      type: object
      properties:
        user:
          type: string
          description: User ID who performed this event
        reaction:
          type: string
          description: The only reaction that we need is a heart emoji
        item_user:
          type: string
          description: User ID that created the original item that has been reacted to
        item:
          type: object
          properties:
            channel:
              type: string
              description: Channel information of original message
            ts:
              type: string
              description: Timestamp information of original message
        event_ts:
          type: string
          description: Reaction timestamp `}
</CodeBlock>

## Summary

> In this tutorial, you learned to create an AsyncAPI document for a Slackbot using WebSocket in Socket Mode. You gained practical insights into the functionality of operations, channels, messages, and schemas. Now you're equipped to handle real-world applications that facilitates bidirectional real-time data exchange such as chatbots and live-streaming platforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you learned to create an AsyncAPI document for a Slackbot using WebSocket in Socket Mode. You gained practical insights into the functionality of operations, channels, messages, and schemas. Now you're equipped to handle real-world applications that facilitate bidirectional real-time data exchange, such as chatbots and live-streaming platforms.
```

</Remember>

```
asyncapi: '3.0.0'
info:
  title: Create an AsyncAPI Document for a Slackbot with WebSockets
  version: '1.0.0'
  description:  |
    The Heart-Counter manages popular messages in a Slack workspace by monitoring message reaction data
    
servers:
  production:
    host: wss-primary.slack.com
    pathname: /link
    protocol: wss
    description: Slack's server in Socket Mode for real-time communication 
```

## Define messages and schemas

Your AsyncAPI document needs to be very clear on the type of event it is expected to receive. Here's where the `messages` component steps in. Using the `payload` property, you can specify what these events should look like, their structure, and what content they carry.

The `payload` attribute specifies the name, format, and description of all expected properties, and can even set constant values that must be followed during schema validation.
For example, in `reaction` schema definition, any API message received from this channel must follow the constant value for the `reaction` property which is clearly defined as “heart”.

> The `const` value feature ensures that the data exchanged through your API complies with your specified constants, helping to maintain data integrity and accuracy.

Reviewer 2: unfortunately you will have to remove this `const` part for `reaction` schema that you added to enforce acceptance of `heart` reactions only. Thing is that now we know about https://api.slack.com/apis/connections/socket#acknowledge which means that you cannot by default reject some specific reaction events basing on `reaction` string, as you need to acknowledge every single event
